JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight": The
House Intelligence
Committee chairman voices doubt
that former
President Obama ordered wiretaps
of Trump
Tower.
But President Trump stands by
his claim.
Also ahead this Wednesday:
Malcolm Brabant
takes us to Turkey, where
President Erdogan
is seeking more power during a
time of political
and religious tensions.
MALCOLM BRABANT: President
Erdogan's popularity
and policies are about to be put
to the test
in a referendum to decide
whether Turkey should
have a United States-style
presidency, but
without the checks and balances.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
possibilities of
computer-connected
brains -- how researchers are
experimenting
with implants to help people
with paralysis.
DENNIS DEGRAY, Clinical Research
Participant:
It's very liberating.
To be able to utilize a portion
of my body
that has not worked to actually
cause and
effect is great fun.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Short-term
interest rates are
going up again in the United
States for the
second time in three months.
The Federal Reserve announced
another quarter-point
increase today.
Policy-makers suggested in a
statement that
economic growth is improving,
and Fed Chair
Janet Yellen said that makes it
more likely
there will be two additional
rate hikes this
year.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: The simple
message is the economy is doing
well.
We have confidence in the
robustness of the
economy and its resilience to
shocks.
It's performed well over the
last several
years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Fed is
predicting growth
at a rate of 2.1 percent this
year and next.
President Trump has talked of 4
percent growth.
We will have more on the
potential economic
effects of the rate hike later
in the program.
In the day's other news: Two
Russian intelligence
officers and two cyber-hackers
now face U.S.
criminal charges in a Yahoo data
breach that
compromised 500 million
accounts.
The acting assistant attorney
general, Mary
McCord, announced the action
today.
It's the first to implicate
Russian officials
directly in cyber-crime.
MARY MCCORD, Acting Assistant
Attorney General:
We will not allow individuals,
groups, nation
states or a combination of them
to compromise
the privacy of our citizens, the
economic
interests of our companies, or
the security
of our country.
There are no free passes for
foreign state-sponsored
criminal behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
hackers is in custody
in Canada.
The others remain at large, and
it's not clear
if they will ever see an
American courtroom,
since Russia has no extradition
treaty with
the United States.
In Syria, suicide bombers killed
at least
31 people in twin attacks in
Damascus, this
as the country enters its sixth
year of civil
war.
The state news agency says the
first attacker
blew himself up in the main
judicial building
as police started to search him.
A second bomb went off inside a
nearby restaurant.
Meanwhile, in Afghanistan, the
death toll
from an assault on a military
hospital rose
to 50 today.
The attack, a week ago, was
claimed by the
Islamic State group.
Officials said a suicide bomber
blew up his
car, and gunmen disguised in lab
coats stormed
the hospital in Kabul.
Investigators have detained 24
people, including
medical staffers.
A disaster at a landfill outside
Ethiopia's
capital has now claimed 113
lives.
The death toll rose again today,
as search-and-rescue
efforts continued in mountains
of garbage
which collapsed on Saturday and
buried makeshift
huts at the site.
Voting has ended in the
Netherlands, and exit
polls show Dutch voters have
rejected a bid
for power by an anti-Islam
party.
Geert Wilders and his far-right
followers
did worse than expected against
center-right
Prime Minister Mark Rutte, who'd
warned against
electing Wilders.
MARK RUTTE, Prime Minister of
the Netherlands:
Having a political leader wants
to take away
the Koran from Muslims in the
Netherlands,
who wants to close our mosques,
the wrong
sort of populism is not
addressing the real
issues of the people, only
making them bigger,
instead of solving them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wilders
acknowledged that he'd
lost, but he vowed that he'd be
back.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Senate confirmed
former Indiana Senator Dan Coats
as director
of national intelligence.
He will oversee 16 intelligence
agencies,
and could be a key player in
probes of Russian
meddling in last year's
election.
President Trump moved today to
dial back federal
rules on auto fuel economy.
Just before President Obama left
office, the
EPA finalized a standard that
automakers reach
an average of 54 miles a gallon
by 2025.
That's double the current
standard.
The industry strongly objected.
And today, in Ypsilanti,
Michigan, Mr. Trump
said the EPA is going back to
the drawing
board.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The assault on American auto
industry, believe
me, is over.
It's over.
Not going to have it anymore.
If the standards threatened auto
jobs, then
commonsense changes could have
and should
have been made.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Environmentalists
have argued
the higher standard would
promote use of hybrids
and electric vehicles and cut
carbon dioxide
emissions.
The White House signaled again
today that
it's open to changing the
Republican replacement
for Obamacare.
A spokesman said the president
is working
with House Speaker Ryan and
other leaders.
There was also word that more
than 12 million
people signed up for coverage
this year under
Obamacare and enrolled on
federal and state
exchanges.
A portion of one of the
president's federal
income tax returns has surfaced
for the first
time.
The leaked document shows that
for the 2005
tax year, Mr. Trump reported
earnings of $153
million, and paid $36 million in
taxes.
He wrote off more than $100
million in business
losses.
The White House criticized the
leak, but didn't
challenge the document's
authenticity.
In a tweet today, the president
called it
-- quote -- "fake news."
Reports of sexual assault rose
at two of the
U.S. service academies this
year.
According to the Associated
Press, they were
up at the Naval Academy and the
military academy
at West Point.
The Air Force Academy saw a
sharp drop.
The AP says a separate anonymous
survey found
sexual misconduct is actually
rising at all
three schools.
And on Wall Street, stocks took
the latest
interest rate hike in stride.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained more
than 112 points to close at
20950.
The Nasdaq rose 43 points, and
the S&P 500
added nearly 20.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what lawmakers
have and have not found in their
ongoing Russia
investigation; a key U.S. ally,
Turkey, is
set to decide whether its
strongman president
should have even broader power;
and much more.
Russia's role in last year's
election, alleged
contacts between the Trump team
and Moscow,
and President Trump's allegation
that he was
wiretapped by his predecessor,
all these were
front and center on Capitol Hill
today.
John Yang reports.
REP.
DEVIN NUNES (R), California: I
don't think
that there was an actual tap of
Trump Tower.
JOHN YANG: Leaders of the House
Intelligence
Committee cast fresh doubt today
on President
Trump's claim that
then-President Obama illegally
wiretapped Trump Tower.
Committee Chairman Devin Nunes:
REP.
DEVIN NUNES: President Obama
wouldn't physically
go over and wiretap Trump Tower.
So now you have to decide, as I
mentioned
to last week, are you going to
take the tweets
literally?
And if you are, then clearly the
president
was wrong.
But if you're not going to take
the tweets
literally, and if there's a
concern that the
president has about other
people, other surveillance
activities looking at him or his
associates,
either appropriately or
inappropriately, we
want to find that out.
JOHN YANG: The committee gave
the Justice
Department until last night to
produce any
evidence to support the
president's claim.
Instead, the department got an
extension until
next Monday, when FBI Director
James Comey
is to testify before the panel.
Adam Schiff is the committee's
top Democrat.
REP.
ADAM SCHIFF (D), California: I
do think it's
incumbent that, if we get to
March 20 and
we have the testimony I think we
all expect
from the director that there was
no substance
to the accusation that Barack
Obama illegally
wiretapped Trump Tower, that the
president
explain himself.
I think this -- you can't level
an accusation
of that type without either
retracting it
or explaining just why it was
done.
JOHN YANG: Senator Lindsey
Graham wants to
know if there's a warrant for a
wiretap.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: Congress
is going to flex its muscle
here.
We will issue a subpoena to get
the information.
JOHN YANG: FBI Director Comey
was on Capitol
Hill this afternoon to brief
leaders of the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
Chairman Chuck Grassley and top
Democrat Dianne
Feinstein want to know about
former National
Security Adviser Mike Flynn's
contacts with
Russian officials.
Flynn is one of several Trump
associates under
scrutiny for dealings with
Russians during
the campaign.
One-time Trump adviser Roger
Stone said today
he thinks a special surveillance
warrant uncovered
his contacts with a
Russian-linked hacker
who claimed credit for the
cyber-attack on
the Democratic National
Committee.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And late today
came word that,
in an interview to air tonight
on FOX News,
the president was asked again
about his wiretapping
accusation, and he said:
"Wiretap covers a
lot of different things.
I think you're going to find
some very interesting
items coming to the forefront
over the next
two weeks."
Back on Capitol Hill, lawmakers
from both
parties expressed frustration
with FBI Director
James Comey, and what they say
is an unwillingness
to provide them with critical
information.
Joining us now, Democratic
Senator Joe Manchin,
a member of the Intelligence
Committee.
Senator, thank you for being
with us.
Are you getting the cooperation
you need from
the intelligence community?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN (D), West Virginia:
Well, Judy,
first of all, it's good to be
with you.
And we are going to be able to
get that.
We have been speaking to them.
We have been out to the CIA.
We're looking at all the
documents, and they're
providing those to us.
The Intel Committee is able to
get in-depth,
if you will, with all of our
different intelligence
agencies.
I have great confidence in them,
and we have
got to get to the bottom.
There's an awful lot that's
going on here.
There's two different paths.
You have one with the Russians
involved in
our election process.
To what extent -- we know they
made an attempt.
They made more of an attempt
this time than
ever before.
We know that the outcome of the
election,
they were not able to intervene
or interfere
with that or disrupt that
whatsoever, but
their desire was there.
We must prevent that from ever
happening again
and also to help our allies.
Then you have the other Russian
intervention,
if you will.
How much of an association is
there?
Is there any type of with the
associates from
President Trump during the
campaign, his people,
himself, his family, whatsoever?
And is there any intertwinement?
So, I think the American people
want to know.
And we need to get through this
and get -- come
to the conclusion, and do the
business of
this great country.
And, right now, that's our --
that's the hot
topic.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, at this
point, do you
think you're any closer to
knowing whether
there was any, as you call it,
intertwinement
or collusion between the Trump
campaign and
Russian officials?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: I can only say what
we have seen
to date.
Now, I don't see any evidence of
that whatsoever.
But we're just in the start of
this.
So it would be premature for me
to say anything,
a definite yes or no.
But we're going to look at
everything.
We're going to turn over every
stone that
we possibly can.
We're going to make sure we
interview and
bring people in that have --
names have been
mentioned that you have
mentioned on your
"NewsHour," and we're going to
make sure that
we get the facts.
And intelligence is to provide
the facts to
us.
The facts will usually take you
to the truth.
And then, when we get the truth,
we have got
to make the decisions and do
what's best for
this country.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
let me just
stop you there and ask you about
this other
strand of the story today.
And that is President Trump
saying in that
interview that we just mentioned
that we're
going to see more, in his words,
in the next
few weeks come to the forefront
about the
wiretap that he accused
President Obama of
being behind.
What do you know at this point
about that?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: Well, the only
thing I can discuss
and what I know about that is
what you all
have been reporting on and what
has been reported
in the news today.
Jeff Sessions said he didn't
advise or didn't
say a thing about a wiretap and
knows of no
wiretap.
And there's no evidence of
showing any wiretap
to date.
If there's other evidence to
come forth, we
will be happy to look at that
and evaluate
it and investigate it, but, as
of right now,
that has not come forth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the end --
well, let me
just rephrase that.
Is it up to the White House, for
the president
to provide whatever evidence he
has?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: Well, I would think
that, if
he has evidence that the
intelligence community
doesn't have, and it's not being
brought forth,
and he wants to make sure that
that's considered
into this whole process, then I
would hope
that they would.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me turn you,
Senator, to
the other issue that we're
covering right
now on the Hill, and that is, of
course, health
care reform, the Republican
relationship legislation
that seems to be running into
more opposition
from Republican members of the
House and the
Senate.
Where do you think that stands
right now?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: Well, it's over in
the House,
and I guess, if they put the
push on, they
can push that out and send it
over to the
Senate.
I don't see a receptive
audience.
I don't know of one Democrat
that would vote
for the process they're sending
over for the
piece of legislation.
I'm not voting to repeal, Judy.
I have been very clear.
I told President Trump this many
weeks ago.
There's no way I can vote to
repeal and throw
people off, when I know the
political toxic
atmosphere that we have in
Washington, thinking
that we can come back and repair
it.
They can get rid of it with 51
votes.
They don't need a Democrat.
But they can't fix it unless
they have eight
of me, eight Democrats who are
willing to
sit down and work and fix some
of the market
conditions that we have that
make it so really
costly and very hard, very much
a hardship
on a lot of people that didn't
get the expansion
or the subsidies or any of that.
So, I understand where the
problems are.
But no one seems to want to fix
it.
So, I said this.
I said, why don't we vote and
sit down, have
a working group voting on the
market repairs
that we could do, and see if you
can get 60
votes, before you throw the baby
out with
the bath water?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And have they
responded affirmatively
to any -- to your suggestion or
anything like
it?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: I have only had one
-- one of
my colleagues -- Republican
Senator Bill Cassidy
come over.
And we have sat down twice to
see if there
was a pathway forward.
He had a piece of legislation.
We looked at it.
We told him our concerns with
it, but we had
a dialogue going.
And then, basically, the House
has gone off
on their own, and the things
that we, Bill
and I, were talking about didn't
materialize.
So, nobody seems to want to do
anything.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm sorry to
interrupt you.
But just quickly, so, at this
point, where
do you see this legislation
headed?
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: I don't see it
moving on this
side.
I really don't, on the Senate
side right now,
unless there are some tremendous
changes made.
Judy, let me just tell you, the
state of West
Virginia, 172,000 people got the
expansion.
That means the people that were
not on Medicaid,
but within the 139 percentile --
172,000.
Another 36,000, 38,000 got some,
basically,
subsidies.
That means, because of their
income, they
were subsidized about $388.
And then we had the donut hole
filled for
our seniors.
We have a poorer population.
All of a sudden now, all of a
sudden, they're
going to give the wealthiest of
the wealthiest
in the country $575 billion tax
credits, $575
billion.
And that's going to be on the
backs of the
poor, the elderly, and those who
have been
addicted and are getting in
treatment centers
or being able to get treated for
addiction,
which is a horrible problem in
my state.
So, I get hit three ways.
The poor get hit harder, the
elderly pay more,
and the people that are addicted
are not going
to get treatment that's needed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Joe
Manchin of West
Virginia, we thank you.
SEN.
JOE MANCHIN: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on
questions about
the Trump campaign's connections
with Russia,
the battle over health care, and
the president's
newly leaked tax return, we turn
to Matt Schlapp.
He is chair of the American
Conservative Union.
And Karine Jean-Pierre, she was
a senior adviser
to MoveOn.org during the 2016
elections.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Matt, I'm going to start with
you.
It's been more than 10 days, I
think, since
President Trump tweeted that
President Obama
had wiretapped him...
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White House
Director
of Political Affairs: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... during the
campaign.
So far, no evidence of this,
investigations
under way.
Where does this stand?
MATT SCHLAPP: Well, first of
all, this term
wiretap is kind of an
old-fashioned term.
What we have been reading about
in most of
the respected newspapers across
the country,
back before the election,
through the inauguration,
and afterwards, was that there
were people
in the Trump team, on the Trump
team who were
under investigation for
inappropriate ties
with Russia, that there were
phone calls that
had been intercepted.
So, all of this was reported.
The question is, was something
done inappropriately?
And I think that's what -- I
think that's
what the president wants to
know, and I think
a lot of other people want to
know as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much urgency
is there around
this question, Karine?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, Democratic
Strategist:
I think there should be a lot
more urgency
than we're currently seeing.
I think at this point up to the
FBI to really
step in and let us know, what is
really happening?
I think one of the issues that
we're seeing
here is Donald Trump is not
being presidential.
He tweets without understanding
the consequences
of his tweet.
There's no measurement of what
he's saying.
And it's incredibly dangerous to
accuse your
predecessor of potentially
breaking the law.
And I think, at the end of the
day, we have
to -- we have to really look and
ask the question,
what happens if there is a true,
actual national
security crisis?
Are we going to believe Donald
Trump?
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much does it
matter, Matt,
that we get to the bottom of
this?
MATT SCHLAPP: It matters to me a
lot, because
I actually think that if the
Obama administration
was investigating the Trump
campaign, that
is something we have not seen
before.
That is historic.
And I want to know why.
If that did happen, I want to
know why it
happened.
And I think there's some
explaining to do
to the American voter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And if it didn't
happen, then
the question goes to, why did
President Trump
make this allegation?
MATT SCHLAPP: Of course.
I think it's fair to say that
people want
to hear from the FBI.
But this might shock of two of
you.
There's a lot of us who have
lost a little
confidence in Jim Comey over the
years.
We probably want to hear from
more people
than just Jim Comey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that calls to
mind, Karine,
there is this wider
investigation going on
into connections that Matt
alluded to a moment
ago between the Trump campaign
and Russian
officials.
We don't know where that stands.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Right, and
we need to
have a full, thorough
investigation on that.
Clearly, there is circumstantial
evidence
that shows the Trump
organization has had
some sort of contact with
Russia, and we really
need to get to the bottom of it.
Yes, there should be a special
prosecutor,
but I also think there should be
an independent,
bipartisan commission to really
get down to
the bottom of it, so we know
that that commission
has jurisdiction, that they
could have subpoena
power, and also that it's
public, so that
we know, the American people
know what's going
on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But right now,
you have got
all these investigations under
way.
MATT SCHLAPP: Step by step.
We haven't even filled the
Senate-confirmed
positions at the Department of
Justice.
Both the House committees with
jurisdiction
need to do a full investigation,
and then
we can draw conclusions of what
needs to do
done after that.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think we
could do all
three.
I don't think we have to do one
or the other.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: Don't we just want
the answers?
What does it matter what way you
get the answers?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Well, I
think why not
give it to the public?
Why not show the public what's
going on?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me -- I want
to turn you
both to something else that
we're watching
very closely, and that is health
care repeal
and replace, the American Health
Care Act.
Matt, we are now seeing more and
more Republicans...
MATT SCHLAPP: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... saying they
can't support
the Republican leadership bill
which the White
House signed on to.
Where is this headed?
MATT SCHLAPP: What they decided
to do was
just roll this out and jam it
through.
And in 21st century American
politics, that
is a very difficult path to
take.
They would be smarter to bring
people in.
Nothing, it seems, Judy, gets
people more
passionate than the idea of
their health care
and their very life, and they
want to make
sure we get it right.
And I think jamming through a
piece of legislation
was the wrong way to start.
They're now bringing people in.
The president is bringing people
in.
I think that's going to give it
a better chance
of passage, but it's not there
yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If this is truly
in trouble,
Karine, where do you see this
going next?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Well, what
they have presented,
the Republicans, with Trumpcare,
is, it seems
to be a plan that's more of the
survival of
the fittest.
And like you were saying,
alluding to, health
care is incredibly personal.
And the Republicans had seven
years, seven
years to come up with something
that would
work for everyone.
And they jammed this thing
through, as you
mentioned.
They introduced it on March 7.
They want to have a vote on it
on April 7.
And of course Republicans are
very upset about
it, because this is an assault
on seniors.
You have costs going up,
premiums going up
for people who really need it,
as they're
getting older.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, if this
version doesn't
work, we're going to look at
some changes
coming.
MATT SCHLAPP: If Republicans
don't pass a
replacement for Obamacare this
year, they
are going to be in a world of
hurt.
Now, maybe I could expand it and
say by the
midterm election.
But there has to be a plan
that's put on place
and that passes, so they have to
figure out
a way to go forward.
I think they started off in the
wrong way.
But I think much of what's
included in this
plan does represent what needs
to be done
to fix the incredible mess
Obamacare left
us in.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quick.
Two pages of Donald Trump's,
President Trump's
tax returns from the year 2005.
He paid a quarter of his income
in taxes.
How much have we really learned
here?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think it
brings up more
questions than answers.
It's unfortunate that we have to
play this
cat-and-mouse game just to get
the president's
tax returns.
We still don't know, who does he
do business
with?
Who does he owe money to?
We know he's in debt.
Which foreign banks does he owe
money to?
And I think all of these things
are important
to know, because he's putting
forth foreign
policy and domestic policy, and
we just don't
have those answers yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Matt.
MATT SCHLAPP: He has complied
with the law.
He had to give thorough
financial disclosure
documents to the FEC.
Those are all public documents.
People can go on right now
online and get
all those documents.
I think what we learned on this
rather ridiculous
television show the other day
with this leaked
tax return is that this
ridiculous concept
that he didn't pay taxes for the
last 10 or
20 years was wrong, and,
actually, when you
look at this year, he paid a
higher percentage
of his taxes -- or his tax rate
was higher
than President Obama, than
Bernie Sanders,
than Mitt Romney, than a lot of
the people
who have been criticizing him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We are going to
have to leave
it there, obviously a lot more
to talk about.
Matt Schlapp, Karine
Jean-Pierre, thank you
both.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Thanks,
Judy.
MATT SCHLAPP: Great to be with
you.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what's behind
the Fed's interest rate hike?;
computers and
brain implants that restore the
ability to
communicate; and the artistic
process of putting
a face to fossils.
But first: Citizens of Turkey
vote next month
in a referendum that could grant
President
Recep Tayyip Erdogan
controversial new powers.
Erdogan's push led to a showdown
this week
with Dutch leaders who had
denied permission
to two of Turkey's government
ministers to
rally support among expatriate
Turks who live
in Holland.
And this comes amid an ongoing
purge of tens
of thousands of Turkey's own
government employees,
as special correspondent Malcolm
Brabant reports
from Istanbul.
MALCOLM BRABANT: "We won't shut
up, we're
not afraid, we will not obey,"
they chant.
Turkey's new outcasts are daring
to protest,
despite being labeled as enemies
of the state
in the great purge following
last July's failed
coup attempt.
Tens of thousands of teachers,
academics,
judges, police officers and
civil servants
have been dismissed from their
jobs and stripped
of their passports.
Derya Keskin, an assistant
university professor,
was purged last September after
she signed
a petition calling for peace in
Turkey.
DERYA KESKIN, University
Professor: We can
make a comparison between the
McCarthy era
and Turkey right now.
But this is, I think, worse.
There are similarities, I'm
sure, but this
is worse.
It's just a pretext to get rid
of all lefty
people, all Democrats, even
liberals.
It is expanding to liberals,
actually.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The blanket
allegation made
by the government is that the
purged are followers
of this man, Fethullah Gulen.
A supposedly moderate Muslim
preacher, Gulen
is a former ally of President
Erdogan who
runs Islamist schools and has a
fervent following.
The government alleges he runs a
terrorist
organization called FETO.
It accuses him of orchestrating
the coup attempt
and is demanding that the U.S.
extradites
him from exile in Pennsylvania.
Are you a Gulenist?
Are you a terrorist?
DERYA KESKIN: I'm not a
Gulenist.
I'm not a terrorist.
I'm against all kinds of
violence.
I condemn every kind of
That's why I signed the peace
petition.
AHMET KASIM HAN, Political
Scientist: During
the McCarthy era and during the
Stalin era,
the historical circumstances
were totally
different.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Political
scientist Ahmet
Kasim Han says Turks
traditionally favor stability
over liberty, and suggests there
is some merit
in the government's depiction of
Fethullah
Gulen as a dark force trying to
destabilize
Turkey.
AHMET KASIM HAN: In Turkey,
there is an issue
which is very hard for the
Western mind to
grasp.
Turkey has really gone through a
very aberrant
coup attempt, which has unfolded
a series
of events that has even made the
most informed
Turk surprised to the level of
infiltration
of the Gulenist movement to the
state.
MALCOLM BRABANT: If politics is
a source of
division in Turkey, then so is
religion.
Almost all of the roughly 80
million Turks
are Muslims.
But opinion polls suggest around
half the
population opposes the growing
Islamization
of the country under President
Erdogan.
Since 2002, when he became the
dominant figure
in Turkish politics, the state
has built an
estimated 17,000 mosques.
This small, traditional mosque
will soon be
dwarfed by minarets of a new
Islamic landmark
slated for Taksim Square in the
secular heart
of Istanbul.
Hasan Kara is the chief imam of
Sultanahmet,
Istanbul's blue mosque.
HASAN KARA, Chief Imam,
Sultanahmet (through
translator): Because Recep
Tayyip Erdogan
is a Muslim, a man of character
and brave
who speaks out fearlessly, the
public have
taken to him as a man of the
people and view
him as an idol and role model.
MALCOLM BRABANT: What worries
tens of millions
of Turks is that the vision of
Kemal Ataturk,
the father of the modern nation,
is more seriously
under threat than ever before.
Ataturk revolutionized Turkey in
the 1920s
by realigning it away from the
Eastern world
towards the West, and enshrining
secularism
in the Constitution.
Ataturk's legacy was at the
heart of this
campaign meeting to fight
against the growing
trend in Turkish education
whereby state schools
are transformed into overtly
religious institutions,
and creationism is promoted over
evolution.
Aysel Celikel heads the Society
for the Promotion
of Contemporary Life.
AYSEL CELIKEL, Society for the
Promotion of
Contemporary Life (through
translator): This
situation is, of course,
worrying us, because
the political powers have said
they want to
raise a religious generation.
With all these prayer rooms and
small mosques
opening up at schools with the
kind of education
they're offering, they are
really pumping
this idea of a religious
generation.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is Fatih,
a traditionally
conservative district of
Istanbul, where the
majority of women cover their
heads.
We have come to meet Ihsan
Eliacik, a renowned
Muslim theologian and writer.
He worries that the Turkish
leader might not
be able to control more radical
Islamists
within the country.
He's concerned about homegrown
extremists,
as well as Islamic State
militants, who, earlier
in the Syria conflict, enjoyed
fairly free
movement in Turkey.
IHSAN ELIACIK, Muslim Theologian
(through
translator): There might be a
danger of conflict,
because, with the ruling party,
Islamic extremists
became too powerful.
The ruling party unwittingly
helped them flourish.
And especially because of the
Syrian conflict,
they grew stronger.
They got ahold of weapons and
they got organized.
They thrived.
So it will take time to
eliminate them and
to neutralize them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: President
Erdogan inspires
adulation and disdain in fairly
equal measure.
He argues that changing the
constitution will
help make government more
efficient.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Turkey has come to
a crossroads
on changing the system of
government.
The process has started.
MALCOLM BRABANT: President
Erdogan's popularity
and policies are about to be put
to the test
in a referendum to decide
whether Turkey should
have a United States-style
presidency, but
without the checks and balances.
If Erdogan wins, he will have
much more power,
he will be able to get rid of
the prime minister,
and the role of Parliament will
be much reduced.
His opponents fear that victory
will mean
that an already authoritarian
leader will
become a fully fledged dictator.
The changes could enable Erdogan
to stay in
office until 2029.
This pro-government rally was
addressed by
the prime minister, who was
effectively campaigning
for the president to make him
redundant.
BINALI YILDIRIM, Turkish Prime
Minister (through
translator): These reforms are a
historic
opportunity for our country.
With a strong presidency,
military authority,
military coups and elite groups
will be history.
Nobody will try to interfere in
the business
of people and politicians
elected by people.
WOMAN (through translator): I am
here for
the unity of our country and for
sake of our
youth's future.
MALCOLM BRABANT: "We don't want
to be in chains.
We won't allow anyone to lord
over us," cry
the no campaigners.
President Erdogan's opponents
fear that his
victory on April the 16th will
accelerate
Turkey towards becoming a
theocracy, or religious
state, like Iran.
That's why Turkey's NATO
partners will be
watching this historic vote with
keen interest.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant
in Istanbul.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After years of
holding interest
rates at near zero level, the
Federal Reserve
has entered a new phase, where
short-term
rates may be rising with greater
regularity,
as they did again today.
Jeffrey Brown looks at how the
Fed has changed
its outlook for the economy and
the path ahead
for policy-makers.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the past,
Federal Reserve
Chairwoman Janet Yellen has
expressed concerns
about the strength of the
recovery.
But, today, she told reporters,
"We have confidence
in the robustness of the economy
and its resilience
to shocks."
David Wessel joins me now for
some Fed tea
reading.
He's with the Brookings
Institution and a
contributing correspondent to
The Wall Street
Journal.
David, a largely positive
message, right,
that sustainable growth
continues and can
continue.
What is the Fed seeing?
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: Well,
the Fed is seeing that
unemployment has come
down to the level that they
consider full
employment.
They seem to have a great deal
of confidence
that the economy has finally got
some momentum.
Janet Yellen cited the
confidence of the business
community and consumers that is
showing up
in surveys.
So, I -- and she was very, very
upbeat, I
think.
JEFFREY BROWN: Slightly higher
inflation,
but at a reasonable level,
right?
So, they're not worried about
overheating
this point.
DAVID WESSEL: They're finally
getting to their
goals of getting inflation close
to 2 percent,
getting unemployment down.
She noted that the labor force
participation
rate, the fraction of people who
are working
or looking for work seems to be
going up a
little bit, even though we have
an aging population.
So, she seemed to be very happy
with the way
the economy is going.
JEFFREY BROWN: But clearly
signaling that
this is the trend, right, that
there will
be more hikes to come?
DAVID WESSEL: This is the trend,
but gradual.
There was a lot of talk about
gradual.
If you look at the forecast that
the members
of the Fed's policy-making
committee said,
they're basically seeing a
couple of interest
rate increases this year.
That would still get us to,
like, maybe 1.5
percent by the beginning of next
year, still
very, very low.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you put
together today
and this kind of trend, what
impact on consumers?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, this will
mean that people
are going to pay more to borrow.
Mortgage rates have already gone
up.
They're around 4.2 percent for a
30-year mortgage.
They were below 4 percent just a
few months
ago.
People will see -- who borrow on
their credit
cards will see more.
And, eventually, although it
always takes
a long time, people who have
money in the
banks, savings accounts,
certificates of deposit,
will see those rates start to
creep up.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, there has
been a lot of
discussion in recent weeks,
especially as
the Fed rates -- raises the
rates, vs. this
-- with a steady growth in mind
-- vs. the
president, who talks about a
real push forward,
right?
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And really
getting the economy
going.
DAVID WESSEL: I think what the
Fed fears is
that, if Donald Trump gets big
tax cuts and
big spending increases that take
effect right
now, when the economy is close
to full employment,
they will have to raise rates
more rapidly.
But Janet Yellen made clear that
they're raising
rates now without much
anticipation of a big
fiscal move.
If they get one, I suspect they
will raise
rates more rapidly.
She did, of course, make the
point that if
Congress and the president could
agree on
things that get the long-term
growth rate
up, the rate of productivity
growth or bringing
more people into the work force,
that's something
that the Fed would applaud.
JEFFREY BROWN: We heard her talk
-- she was
asked a little bit about
relations with the
new administration.
It's always a little delicate
dance a bit,
right?
DAVID WESSEL: Yes.
I think she was prepared for the
question.
Right?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, clearly.
DAVID WESSEL: She said wonderful
things about
the treasury secretary.
She said she had met Donald
Trump.
I think her attitude is going to
be, we have
an independent Central Bank for
a reason.
I'm going to do what I think is
right.
And I suspect that people at the
Fed realize
that, at some point, they're
likely to be
the target of an angry Donald
Trump tweet
when he thinks they're raising
rates too fast.
JEFFREY BROWN: And just very
quickly, in the
meantime, the stock market just
keeps going
up, even with the rates going
up.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: They don't seem
to matter.
DAVID WESSEL: The stock market
was relieved
that the Fed didn't sound
tougher today, and
the stock market seems to figure
that everything
they like about Donald Trump
will come true,
and everything they're afraid of
about Donald
Trump will not come true.
JEFFREY BROWN: David Wessel,
thank you, as
always.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For decades,
researchers have
worked to create a better and
more direct
connection between a human brain
and a computer
to improve the lives of people
who are paralyzed
or have severe limb weakness
from diseases
like ALS.
Those advances have been
notable, but now
the work is yielding
groundbreaking results.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
has the story.
It's part of our Breakthroughs
reporting and
for our weekly segment about the
Leading Edge
of science and technology.
CAT WISE: Dennis Degray is a
64-year-old quadriplegic
who is writing a sentence on the
computer
screen in front of him using
only his brain.
A former volunteer firefighter,
Degray had
a bad fall 10 years ago which
severed his
spinal cord.
As part of an early stage
clinical research
study led by Stanford
University, Degray and
two other volunteer participants
with ALS
had small sensors implanted in
their brains
in an area called the motor
cortex, which
controls movement.
Even though Degray can no longer
physically
move his arms, the neurons in
that part of
his brain, and in the brains of
many other
paralyzed individuals, remain
active.
The sensors in his brain listen
in to those
neurons, which emit different
electrical signals
depending on the direction
Degray thinks about
moving his hand.
DENNIS DEGRAY, Clinical Research
Participant:
To move the pointer around, I
imagine a ball
lying on a table and with my
hand lying on
the ball.
And as I roll the ball forward,
the pointer
goes up, and as I roll the ball
back toward
me, the pointer goes down, and,
of course,
left and right correspondingly.
CAT WISE: The neural signals are
transmitted
to the computer through two
devices that screw
into small pieces of equipment
called pedestals
protruding from Degray's scalp.
In the computer, sophisticated
algorithms
turn the movements in his mind
into cursor
movements on the screen.
DENNIS DEGRAY: It's very
liberating.
To be able to utilize a portion
of my body
that has not worked to actually
cause and
effect is great fun, just great
fun.
DR.
JAIMIE HENDERSON, Stanford
University: If
you had asked me five years ago
if I thought
I would see these types of
systems becoming
available any time within my
lifetime, I would
have been pretty skeptical.
But I would say now that, within
the next
10 years or so, we will probably
begin to
see systems that can restore
function to people
with paralysis.
CAT WISE: Dr. Jaimie Henderson
is a professor
of neurosurgery at Stanford
University.
He implanted the sensors in
Degray's brain,
and he is one of the leaders of
a scientific
team from several universities
around the
country working on the
technology called BrainGate.
DR.
JAIMIE HENDERSON: The principles
by which
we're reading out brain signals
are well-established.
The research advance is using
the computer
algorithms to figure out what
the brain is
doing, an operating system that
can read out
signals on millisecond time
scales and feed
that back to the user, so that
they can be
in very tight feedback loop with
the machine
and use it more efficiently.
CAT WISE: That improved
efficiency in the
BrainGate operating system,
which has been
in development for more than a
decade, is
at the heart of a new research
paper Dr. Henderson
and his colleagues released.
The study, which was funded in
part by the
National Institutes of Health,
also a "NewsHour"
funder, highlighted the typing
results of
Degray and the two others in the
study.
DR.
JAIMIE HENDERSON: Our
participants in this
study were able to type at
anywhere between
20 to up to almost 40 correct
characters per
minute, which translates to
somewhere between
four and eight words per minute,
which is
the fastest typing now
demonstrated in people
with paralysis by a factor of
anywhere from
two to four.
This allows you to type at
speeds that are
now approaching what you can use
on a cell
phone.
CAT WISE: Surveys of those with
paralysis
show that speed of communication
is important
to them.
That's one of the frustrations
with current
systems that track eye and face
movements.
One of the goals of the research
now is evaluate
the safety of brain-computer
interfaces, but
there are still a lot of
questions and concerns
about connecting brains to
computers.
It's a debate the Stanford team
embraces.
KRISHNA SHENOY, Stanford
University: Over
the past few decades, we have
become increasingly
comfortable with having various
devices implanted
in our bodies.
CAT WISE: Study co-author
Krishna Shenoy says
his broader research with neural
prosthetics
shows people are comfortable
with much more
now than just knee replacements,
for example,
electrodes to control
Parkinson's tremors.
KRISHNA SHENOY: Fifteen years
ago, society
started to become comfortable
with deep brain
stimulators.
When you turn the system on, the
tremor essentially
stops.
It's like magic.
Tens of thousands of people are
walking around
every day with these electronic
systems in
their brains.
So, the question is, is there
something sacrosanct
about the brain, that we
shouldn't go there?
This is extremely important to
be guided by
bioethics, neuroethics.
And this is a case where we can
do tremendous
good if this is developed and
deployed correctly.
CAT WISE: Dennis Degray says
that, while he's
able to utilize a range of
communication systems,
he's participating in the trial
to help advance
a technology that may benefit
those who don't
have as many options.
DENNIS DEGRAY: What we're
performing here
is basic science.
We're building a foundation upon
which the
roboticists, the communicators,
the mechanical
engineers, medical prosthetic
device manufacturers,
all of them will be able to
utilize the controls
that we are learning about at
this point.
DR.
JAIMIE HENDERSON: We have, I
think, made slow,
but steady progress, and are
getting to the
point where we can now really
imagine systems
that can be fully implanted,
wireless, able
to be used 24 hours a day
without calibration.
I think we're still a ways away
from that,
but we're getting closer.
CAT WISE: The Stanford research
team hopes
to enroll another trial
participant in the
next year or two.
And they are now exploring ways
to connect
people and their brains to new
devices.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Palo
Alto, California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating.
And we will be back shortly with
a look at
an artist who brings dinosaur
fossils to life.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
Nothing captures the
imaginations of children
and adults alike quite like
dinosaurs.
But, for one artist, a childhood
love of prehistoric
creatures inspired a unique, and
prolific,
career.
Special correspondent David
Biello explains.
DAVID BIELLO: Julius Csotonyi is
a paleoartist.
His job is using his artistic
skills to bring
fossilized bones back to life.
JULIUS CSOTONYI, Paleoartist: We
can't go
out there and photograph it
anymore.
So, I think that this is why
paleoart is crucial
to communicating certain aspects
of the science.
DAVID BIELLO: Csotonyi's skills
are highly
sought after by paleontologists
such as Michael
Ryan, the curator of vertebrate
paleontology
at the Cleveland Museum of
Natural History.
MICHAEL RYAN, Cleveland Museum
of Natural
History: It takes our research
one step further
than we could do it on our own.
DAVID BIELLO: Ryan's specialty
is horned dinosaurs,
known as Ceratopsians, of which
Triceratops
is the most famous example.
When Ryan discovers uncovers a
new Ceratopsian,
he often calls on Csotonyi to
bring it back
When Ryan discovers uncovers a
new Ceratopsian,
he often calls on Csotonyi to
bring it back
to life.
MICHAEL RYAN: Julius is one of
the best of
the current crop of new dinosaur
artists.
He did a beautiful piece when we
named a new
horned dinosaur from Southern
Alberta called
He did a beautiful piece when we
named a new
horned dinosaur from Southern
Alberta called
Xenoceratops.
DAVID BIELLO: When a new
dinosaur is identified,
Csotonyi and Ryan discuss its
major anatomical
features and what its living
environment may
have been.
Then Csotonyi gets to work.
JULIUS CSOTONYI: I mostly start
at the head.
Over several rounds of revision
and review,
we come to a rough sketch that
is agreeable
Over several rounds of revision
and review,
we come to a rough sketch that
is agreeable
to everybody, and then I start
to add the
color layers to it.
DAVID BIELLO: The final piece
shows what a
dinosaur like Xenoceratops might
have looked
like in real life.
MICHAEL RYAN: We're trying to
get our research
out to the public.
We can do that by writing
scientific papers.
We can put the
bones
that make up those fossils on
display in museums.
But one of -- the best way to
get images out
of what these things look like
is to work
with artists.
People visually cue off a nice
colorful painting
of a dinosaur.
DAVID BIELLO: Every year,
millions of people
see Csotonyi's work in books, in
magazines,
and at more than 20 museums
around the world.
JULIUS CSOTONYI: I would be
doing it in my
free time anyway, even if it
wasn't a job.
I do my best at visualizing what
these looked
like when they were actually
alive and to
try to take people through this
world that
is no longer accessible to us.
DAVID BIELLO: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
David Biello in Cleveland, Ohio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some
late-breaking news out
of Hawaii tonight.
A federal judge there has
granted a temporary
restraining order blocking
President Trump's
revised travel ban from taking
effect nationwide.
The ban was intended to take
effect at midnight.
It temporarily barred travelers
from six Muslim-majority
countries and most refugees from
entering
the U.S.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.